[MUSIC PLAYING]
LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
So what if you found out that
90 is the new middle age?
And what if we are not the
effect of our genetics at all
and we discovered how
to completely rewrite
our genetic code?
Well, some people currently
live their lives this way.
And joining me is one of
them, Dr. Mario Martinez.
Dr. Martinez is a clinical
neuropsychologist.
And he is the founder
of biocognitive science.
And he lectures worldwide
on how cultural beliefs
affect health and longevity
more than genetics.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for being here.
DR MARIO MARTINEZ:
Pleasure to be here.
LISA: So what is
biocognitive science?
MARTINEZ: Biocognitive
science brings together
psychoneuroimmunology-- is an
area that studies how thoughts
and emotions affect the immune
system and other systems--
and anthropology,
how cultures shape
are our beliefs about health,
wellness, and so forth.
But those two disciplines aren't
really speaking to each other.
So what I did is I brought mind,
body, and culture together.
LISA: So give me an
example of how culture
affects somebody's genetics.
MARTINEZ: All right,
for example, menopause.
Menopause has been turned
to an illness, and it's not.
It's a process.
In Peru and other
countries, the hot flashes
are called bochorno,
which means shame.
And we know now from research
in psychoneuroimmunology,
the shame actually
causes inflammation.
So when you're shamed, you'll
have an inflammatory response.
So women in Peru, because
they call it shame
and the culture sees it a
shame, have a very high level
of inflammation during
their menopause,
especially with the hot flashes.
Go to another culture,
you go to Japan.
And in Japan, the menopause
and the hot flashes
are called the second spring,
an opportunity for a woman
to gain more power in
the sense of respect,
to be a resource for wisdom.
They don't have
the inflammation.
LISA: Interesting.
MARTINEZ: So your culture
will shape the biology
to a certain degree.
LISA: In the
experience that you've
had with training people
all around the world
and blending that gap between
neurocognitive science
and their culture,
what do you think
is the biggest break down
with people in their cultures?
MARTINEZ: Well, I
think that the problem
is that people think that,
for example, the medicine is
the same everywhere, that
if you have an infection
you just need an
antibiotic everywhere.
It's not like that at all.
In the United States,
the cause that's
given to migraines is vascular,
but if you go to the UK
is gastrointestinal.
If you go to France, it's liver.
So even medicine
has a way of going
into the system,
one with vascular,
the other one with
the gastrointestinal.
And what happens
to the migraines
probably has effects
on different parts,
but the culture decides where
to go in to take care of it.
LISA: I wonder which
one is more effective.
MARTINEZ: They're all as
effective because what
happened-- that's
a great question--
because what makes
it so effective
is the placebo effect, as
well as the biochemistry.
If you get, what I call the
culture editors, a doctor
in a clinic, a mother at home--
LISA: Cultural editors--
MARTINEZ: And it's telling you
that that cultural editor will
say this is really
very good for you,
and it works, because
you have biochemistry,
but you also have the belief
system from an authority.
And that kicks in
right the healing value
that we all have to self-heal.
LISA: I wonder if the opposite
happens where you don't believe
that medicine is going to help
you and you're told it is,
but if you don't personally
believe it, it's not going to,
is it?
MARTINEZ: You'll fight
it, that's right.
And even worse will
be the nocebo effect--
would be the
opposite of placebo.
I shall heel.
I shall harm is nocebo.
You're told you have
six months to live.
That's nocebo.
You're being sentenced there.
That's not good science.
That's based on averages.
And when they look at the curve,
the normal curve, that illness,
you may have six months
to live on the average.
But if you look at the other
side of the tail with the tail
at the end, the people who
live 7 years, 10 years,
they don't look at that.
They consider that
a nuisance variable.
They only look at the middle.
So you're being sentence with
a science that is not really
as accurate as they're saying.
LISA: That so needs
to change, though,
because the doctors are saying
these statistics to protect
themselves legally.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: And they
have an obligation
to be able to state the facts.
But I don't think there is an
awareness on the damage that
is done when that death
sentence is given.
MARTINEZ: Of course.
You can do it ethically.
You could say on the average
people live six months.
Now we know of many
cases that live 10 years.
What we need to do is, what
can we learn from those people
those people using
the causes of health?
The people that
die early are using
the learning of an illness.
Illnesses are learned.
So that--
LISA: Illnesses are learned?
MARTINEZ: I think so.
I think there's
some-- of course,
there are 2%, 3%
of illnesses that
are genetically already
set as an expression
of a mistake, a genetic mistake.
But that's 2%, 3%.
The rest, your immune
system is consistently
relentlessly trying to
keep you healthy, rather
than the other way around.
What we learn is we
learn to get sick.
Not to blame.
You don't blame yourself.
But you learn to get sick.
If, for example, it
was functional for you
to be very passive and
take on a lot of abuse,
well, that was
functional at the time.
You don't get sick, because
this is a preservation.
But let's say 10 years
you keep doing that.
You have created a
deficient immune system,
because you're responding
from helplessness.
That deficient immune
system, you can pick up
whatever is going on, whatever
pre-cancer cells to infections.
So you're teaching a system
to be deficient if you're
deficient by your behavior.
LISA: Interesting.
So in a sense, that's
what the cultural behavior
is learning a
culture of sickness
rather than learning
a culture of wellness.
MARTINEZ: Yes, exactly.
LISA: You shared with me that
you work with certain Fortune
100 companies with the
executives at the companies
on how not to burn
themselves out health-wise
as making dozens and
dozens of decisions a day.
How do you teach
them to do that?
MARTINEZ: What I teach them--
and at first they think
I'm just coming from Mars--
and I tell them I'm
going to teach you
how to make decisions
in your organization
like the immune system does.
The immune system makes hundreds
of thousands of decisions
a second without
centralized brain function.
LISA: OK, automatically?
MARTINEZ: Automatically.
Because what the
immune system does
is if you have an
infection somewhere,
whatever molecule or whatever
cell from the immune system
is taking care of it, that
becomes the local brain.
It becomes the
local intelligence.
And then when it can't
do anything more,
then it'll call in
whatever it needs.
And that's called the
distributed control.
That simple
decision-making process,
decentralized and local
intelligence and distributed
control changes not
only the creativity
and the productivity, but it
changes the greatest problem
we have in corporate America
and corporate world is
chronic illnesses.
LISA: With the executives,
with hypertension and all that,
yeah.
MARTINEZ: Because what's
happening is what's making them
sick is not the stressful job--
stress can be good or bad--
it's the organizational
culture that they create
that causes helplessness.
LISA: Well, it's
interesting because we're
moving in such a
faster paced world now.
And it's just
getting get faster.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: So it's
almost like we need
to be super humans to catch
up with the pace of business
these days.
MARTINEZ: Well,
in a way, what you
want to do is you want to
be able to be mindful, to be
selective of the information.
An example, attention deficit
disorder, it's not a disorder.
It's been turned into
an illness and it's not.
And I know the
neurochemistry and whatnot.
What it is is that these kids
have abundance of curiosity--
LISA: And creativity--
MARTINEZ: And creativity.
So you have to set
up the environment
to increase the novelty.
But the classrooms
aren't set up for them.
So it's better to medicate
and create a little zombie
than treat it appropriately.
LISA: They're set up
for be quiet an listen.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
And these kids get
bored because they
have an abundance of novelty.
LISA: And they
don't have any say.
MARTINEZ: They
LISA: Yeah, they're
told not to talk.
OK, there's a couple of
slides that we have here.
And this particular
slide, you say
that most illnesses are learned
and the causes of health
are inherited.
What do you mean by that?
We've kind of been
talking about this.
MARTINEZ: We're born with
tremendous resilience.
We're born with a
system that knows
how to pick up on foreign bodies
without even you knowing it,
because they're
fighting constantly.
So we're already set up with all
the causes that create health.
We're already born with it.
It's in our DNA, and it's
expressed through our genes.
The illnesses are learned--
many illnesses, not
all, because some
are genetic, specifically
genetic, but very low percent.
The rest is our behavior,
our belief systems,
our way of doing
things, the behavior
is teaching the immune system.
It's teaching the
nervous system.
endocrine system
to function based on the
consciousness that we live.
So I'll give you an
example, fibromyalgia,
which is very common now.
Fibromyalgia, the most of
the problem of fibromyalgia
is that you have a sleep
deficit in delta, delta sleep.
And delta is where the
immune system does a repair.
The pituitary release of some
of the human health hormones.
And that's what does the
repair and increases the energy
in the cells and all that.
So you learned to
be hyper vigilant.
You learned to be very cautious
when you were a little girl
because grandpa
would come in and do
something that was inappropriate
when you were sleeping.
So I had an initial
function of wisdom.
LISA: I see.
MARTINEZ: You had to
learn to be hypervigilant.
What happens when
you're hyper vigilant?
You teach your nervous system
to also be hypervigilant.
You teach your immune system
to be deficient because you
are being hypervigilant.
It works because it has a
function of preservation.
You wait 10 years when
grandpa is no longer there.
You've taught your
nervous system
to create chronic pain with
the primary pain receptors.
You taught your immune system
to be deficient because it's not
getting the delta sleep.
And you taught your
endocrine system
to release
pro-inflammatory products.
So you taught the system
fibromyalgia-- not to blame--
but that's what you taught it.
The good news is if you learn
something, you can unlearn it.
LISA: Unlearn it.
MARTINEZ: You can
unlearn fibromyalgia.
LISA: And so in effect it's as
if the grandfather is always
there.
That's the way that
the brain is working.
But you can reverse that
through things like awareness,
but also through what you talk
about in terms of the mind body
code.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: So we have here a slide
of the cover of "The Mind Body
Code."
This particular picture
that we're looking at here
is the cover of
your CD set, right?
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: OK, what is
the mind body code?
MARTINEZ: I studied two
very unusual populations--
centenarians, people
who are over 100,
but healthy centenarians,
not centenarians who are
vegetating and in bad shape.
And I found that
their genetics is only
about the genetic
contribution to the longevity.
So maybe 20% top.
Another very interesting group
of people, very, very unusual
are the people with stigmata,
who have the wounds of Christ.
And they're only the
Catholics-- see the culture.
And when you find a legitimate
stigmatic, 1 out of 100--
and there've only been about
380 since Saint Francis
and the 13th century--
you find that these people
have a hyperimmunity.
And people around them,
if they're Catholic,
will have spontaneous healing.
So that's a mind body code.
That is by believing
something, you
trigger something that is
transbiological in a sense.
One for National Geographic had
a woman who had the stigmata,
and a man was cured, total
spontaneous remission,
of prostate cancer, and
a little boy of leukemia.
And I followed up with their
physician nine months later,
no symptoms.
LISA: Oh, my
goodness, we're going
to take a look at that National
Geographic piece in a minute.
Fascinating.
So they have hyperimmunity.
What about these particular
people, the centenarians?
MARTINEZ: The centenarians they
defy what gerontology tells us,
that you go from
order to disorder,
because we borrowed
them from physics.
That's good for carburetors
and planets and other things,
but not for human beings.
We don't go from
order to disorder.
We go from simple to complex.
So what we think that's
becoming a deteriorating brain
is becoming a complex brain.
So these centenarians,
they don't
buy into what I call
the cultural portals--
infancy, young adult, middle
age, third age or elderly.
And without us knowing it, it's
so subtle, if you're 44 today,
you're pre-middle age.
But if the next day you're
45, you're middle age.
And you fall into a portal.
You begin to dress middle age.
The car has to be middle age.
You have to be thinking
about retirement.
And that's what ages you
to the greatest degree.
LISA: So as I said earlier,
90 being the new middle age,
I got that from you
CD series, yeah.
MARTINEZ: And when you
ask a centenarian--
I'll ask them anywhere
in the world--
what's middle age?
I don't know.
I'll find out when I die.
They don't know.
LISA: Look backwards.
MARTINEZ: And the worst
thing you could do
is go to an actuarial
and see this is my age
and this is how long
I'm going to live.
That's sentencing yourself.
That's not good science.
Those are probabilities,
but not sentencing.
LISA: Those are statistics.
So this particular
gentleman that you
have running here a marathon.
At what age is he?
MARTINEZ: He ran
this marathon at 101.
And he started running
I believe in his 80s
because his son died.
And in order to deal with
that, he started running.
And when you train your body,
your body will continue to run.
And then 101.
LISA: 101.
MARTINEZ: He completed
the marathon.
LISA: And he started
running at 85.
So the ideas of the
joints not holding up
for the long period of time,
he didn't have that thought.
MARTINEZ: No.
And actually, your joints--
there's some damage.
I think swimming is
better in general.
But it will do some damage.
But what happens is that
what you're believing
and what you're doing,
you're being cautious
because another thing
about centenarians,
they're very cautious.
You don't find any
addictive centenarians.
They're middle way.
They'll smoke a cigar
before they go to sleep,
but only a cigar.
And if you ask them, why
don't you smoke any more?
I only enjoy one.
And it's a ritual,
rather than a routine.
So this runner at 101 completed
the marathon actually.
LISA: Oh, my goodness, 20
something miles, 27 miles,
my goodness.
Now, this is funny.
I mean now how many
of the centenarians
have a sense of humor?
This next picture is
actually terrifying.
MARTINEZ: I would say
a very high percent.
This woman on her
100th birthday,
she just lit up a
cigarette with the candles.
LISA: Oh, does she smoke?
MARTINEZ: She smoked, yes.
LISA: She and George Burns.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: But you said they
don't take a lot of risks.
This particular one that was a--
every body is
different, who knows?
MARTINEZ: Well,
they don't abuse.
What they do is they do it in--
a ritual is something that
you do to identify who you are
and your culture and
to really enjoy like,
for example, a birthday,
going to an exalted place
or religious place once a year.
Those things identify who
you are and your culture.
A Cuban centenarian,
this woman was about 103.
I asked her-- at first I would
think-- what's your secret?
And she said, well, I
have a little shot of rum
before I go to
sleep every night.
And I thought it's got to
be some quality of the run,
and not the rum
and not the cigar.
What I found is that
quality is in the ritual,
whatever you, do the ritual.
So she would have a shot of rum,
but she wasn't an alcoholic.
She would drink the rum as a
ritual before going to sleep.
And that kind of
process, you're very
aware of what you're doing.
It's not habitual like
taking a shower, or driving
and you get some where and
you say, I can't believe
I just got here.
That's habit.
But when you do it
ritualistically,
it actually has a very
powerful effect on your health.
LISA: Wasn't that an old remedy?
An old cold remedy
is a shot of rum.
She's still using it.
MARTINEZ: That's right.
And they'll say for
medicinal purposes only.
They'll say, but--
LISA: Right, right.
OK, so now, this next picture
is this wonderful couple.
They look great.
Who are these guys?
MARTINEZ: They're what I
call the commitments to
for centering consciousness.
The present is never too
late to make commitments.
The one on the left,
they're married.
They got married.
And on the one on the
right, I think in his 90s,
he went back to college
and got his degree
when he was very
close to being 100.
So the present is never too
late to make commitments.
LISA: Wow.
And they got married at 100.
So there's centenarians that
are a hundred years old.
And then there's
super centenarians
that are a hundred--
MARTINEZ: 110.
LISA: 110.
Have you interviewed them?
MARTINEZ: One, yes.
LISA: Where did he live?
MARTINEZ: This is in Ecuador.
And it's interesting.
I have the field
notes and I said,
so do you know you're
a super centenarian?
And he looks at me and
says, what the hell is that?
I said, well, you
know, you're over 110.
And it was very funny.
And what happens is
that these people
when they hit 100, the
deteriorating rate goes down.
LISA: Really?
They deteriorate less.
MARTINEZ: Less.
The deteriorate slower.
And, for example, a
90-year-old, healthy 90-year-old
has a greater probability
of staying healthier
than a 60-year-old.
They have more
experience with health.
LISA: Is that in that
particular culture?
MARTINEZ: No, no.
LISA: Because out here,
we'll say, oh, at 90,
they lived a long, good life.
MARTINEZ: But you see, the
centenarians in this country,
there are 100,000
centenarians now.
LISA: 100,000?
MARTINEZ: They're the
fastest growing segment
of population in the US.
LISA: The US?
MARTINEZ: And when you
ask the centenarians,
they have a culture--
LISA: Really?
MARTINEZ: Yes, they
have a culture.
They don't buy into that--
and unfortunately, medicine,
you go to a doctor, and not all,
but some will say,
well, what do you want?
You're 90.
And there's this
doctor who is 80.
And I always tell this
story, because it's great.
It tells you how
we shape people.
His right knee was
hurting, and he was 80.
And he goes to a colleague.
And he said, my right
knee is hurting.
What do you want?
Your 80.
And he said, I'll
tell you what I want.
My left me is 80.
And it's not hurting.
I want it to be
like my left knee.
But the attribution is
that, well, you're 90.
It's like saying,
just give up and die,
you've been around too long.
LISA: Well, what would you
say that these centenarians
have in common?
MARTINEZ: These things that
we're pointing out here,
they have tremendous
sense of humor.
The present is always an
opportunity to make decisions.
They know how to forgive--
extremely important.
I interviewed one
here in the US who had
been in a concentration camp.
They're not Pollyanna.
They not touchy feely.
They're people that
go through the pain,
but then they get
out of their pain.
So I asked him, how was it?
He said, it was the worst
experience of my life.
And what do you
remember the most?
There was a kid my age,
who was a Nazi, army,
he would sneak
bread into my cell.
And that's what I remember.
I also remember
that my mother was
going to be very upset because
I couldn't write to her.
LISA: Oh, my goodness.
MARTINEZ: And I said, so
what was the first thing
you did when you got out?
I talked to my mother and
I told her what happened,
and she got very
upset with the guards.
It's that resilience, that
way of looking at things.
And I asked him, do
you hate those people?
I dislike him, but
I'm not going to waste
any time with people like that.
I had too many things to do.
LISA: Wow.
Total appreciation for life.
MARTINEZ: Total appreciation.
And what he
remembered was an act
of kindness in a
puddle of infamy.
LISA: One act of kindness pulled
him through all of those years.
MARTINEZ: That's it.
And that's all we need.
When I work with
patients and they tell me
they had a hard
life, I say, look,
it couldn't be worse than
a Nazi concentration camp.
Tune into what has
happened to you,
humane, something
that has touched you,
somebody that gave
you compassion.
And then build from there.
LISA: Do you live
your life differently
after interviewing all
these centenarians?
MARTINEZ: Yes.
I don't tell my age anymore,
because they'll peg you.
You ask him, how old are you?
When I turned 100,
I start lying.
So if they're 100,
they'll say I'm 120.
But before that, you
don't tell you age.
LISA: How funny.
MARTINEZ: And the reason,
I think, bioculturally
is that when you tell
your age, you're pegged.
If you say, I'm 80, oh,
OK, you look so good.
And they put you
into that mindset.
And they don't look what
you have done in your life.
They look at how long
you've been in life.
And they start treating you--
LISA: Definitely--
MARTINEZ: Differently.
And that's what ages people.
LISA: OK, so don't
tell your age,
is the one tip you've learned.
What's another one?
MARTINEZ: Sense of humor.
Find humor in things.
Don't be pollyannish
in the sense
that if something bad happens,
you say, oh, I'm so happy.
Embody what's going
on and then let it go.
And then move into what
is the wisdom here?
The universe has
a lot of comedy.
Go into the comedy to
find out what happens.
Because what it does is
when you're laughing,
you have cardiovascular
dilation.
You're increasing
immune function.
All kinds of things
that are going on.
But you can't do it
before you feel the hit.
You got to feel the hit.
You've got to embody it.
And then allow yourself
to experience it.
LISA: That's interesting.
I have a 10-year-old.
And we were at her soccer game.
And some of the other parents
get so upset with their kids.
They're 10.
And so something
happened on the field,
and I was in the background
next to the parents.
And I said, wow, that's
just pure comedy, because it
was a giant kerfuffle.
And one of the dads got so
mad, because he was just
taking it way too seriously.
He homeschools his kid.
This is her life.
And she's 10.
And so sometimes the
sense of humor gets lost
and it's being taught
to our kids these days.
MARTINEZ: And if you're too
mechanical about teaching, then
what you're teaching
is to be mechanical.
Not the information
that you're teaching.
LISA: Yeah, yeah.
So how can the mind
wound the body?
How can it actually
work against us?
MARTINEZ: If, for
example, we know
that there's
spontaneous healings,
a person believes
something and they actually
are allowed to heal themselves.
I'll give you an example.
There was reported in one
of psychiatric journals,
in a Catholic
hospital, the priest
came into the room
for this patient
to give him the last rites.
He gave him the last rites.
And he died in 15 minutes.
The problem is that he
went to the wrong room.
So what happened is that
in this person's mind,
two authorities in a context,
a doctor and a priest,
are telling me that I'm not
going to be around anymore.
They have that nocebo effect.
And when you do an
autopsy, there's
nothing wrong except some kind
of parasympathetic stopping
of the heart.
But now the person who
was scheduled to die
waited two days for the
priest to come before he died.
So the mind can wound and
can heal based on the belief
systems that we have.
LISA: Wow.
So you can really change--
I mean, the power of
changing your belief system.
And you said to me, look
for the signals of health.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: Not for the
signals of sickness.
MARTINEZ: Exactly.
And an example of what we
were talking about earlier,
if you're not feeling
well, for example--
and of course, you
have to check it out.
You have to go to your doctor.
But you're not feeling well.
You know there's an infection
or something or a cold.
Your body is going
to go into what's
called a sick response,
which is it'll slow down.
And you'll feel a little
bit groggy and tired.
Your system is saying, slow
down so I can take care of you.
So one way to begin to
help that is to tune
into any little signal
you have of recovery.
Like you're breathing a little
bit, you breathe into it.
You feel that less pain,
you tune into that.
So what you're doing is you're
kicking in signals of health
rather signals of the
sickness response.
You compress the
time that you're
going to be spending
sick, but you're actually
helping your immune system.
LISA: Oh, I've done that.
Sat in bed miserable.
Felt sorry for myself.
Thought I was going to die.
Yeah, that's right, the
brain goes immediately
towards the signals of sickness.
MARTINEZ: It defeats it.
And I was telling you before
the show that I flew about 22,
24 hours from Uruguay to
Miami, Miami to San Francisco.
Well, I was beginning to have
the kind of a sense of you're
going to catch something.
So I said, OK, what
happens is you're not
sleeping well on the
plane and not eating well.
And you're really getting
some immune deficiency.
So you're picking up
all that's going on.
I stopped.
I did some of the techniques
that we talked about.
Did a little meditation.
Took some vitamins.
And began to be very
careful not to eat
any refined carbohydrates
for the next two days
because that's pro-inflammatory.
Gone.
I'm fine.
LISA: So if you don't mind, I'd
love to share this technique.
MARTINEZ: Sure.
LISA: So this is a
shamanic technique
that Dr. Martinez taught
me before the show.
And tell me where was
the origin of this?
MARTINEZ: I had a
Tibetan Lama teacher
who taught me the technique.
In their world is moving the
chi, moving the energy around.
In our world, you're
actually creating immunity
and you're creating
some kinds of changes
in your endocrine system.
Do you want me to did it?
LISA: Yeah.
Now how long has this
technique been used?
MARTINEZ: Oh, for thousands
of years, since Buddha.
So about 2,500 years.
So we have a lot to
learn from their ways.
And they have a lot
to learn from us too.
We've taught them what we
can do with functional MRIs
and how the brain
shifts and all that.
But basically what
they're doing is
they're moving, creating
what they call chi.
LISA: So if you have a cold or
if you're feeling low energy,
this is a great thing.
Let's do this together.
MARTINEZ: Hold it like this.
LISA: And we might have a little
bit of an audio problem here,
but we'll figure it out.
MARTINEZ: So you move
your hands like this.
And you're creating a
sense of cohesiveness.
And you could call it chi.
It doesn't matter.
You do this for a few minutes.
And then what you do is
you put your arms gently
over your shoulder crossed and
then go forward nine times.
And you're going
to begin to feel
some movement, some warmth.
And then after 9, 10 times,
then you go backwards.
And then if you
finish, you stop.
And then feel what's happened.
Feel what's happened.
You feel some energy change.
Now, what have you done
psychoneuroimmunology?
First, you created
a placebo effect.
This is something
that's going to work.
Second, the touching
releases oxytocin,
which actually oxytocin
can do all kinds of things.
There are receptors in the
heart that can regulate heart.
You release IGAs, which
are an antibody that
fights upper respiratory
signals and viruses.
And all kinds of other
things that are going on.
You're beginning to feel the
effect of when your grandmother
touch you and loved you.
And so all of that
has a healing effect,
psychoneuroimmunology
has a healing effect.
The Tibetans know how to
do it, but they don't know
the biochemistry behind it.
And you do it.
And it works.
LISA: And you feel--
I mean, it's amazing how
much energy that you get.
It's just like if someone
had come up behind you
and give you a nice neck rub.
Doesn't it always feel
like you just melt
when somebody does that to you?
That's kind of the feeling
that that gives you.
It's so simple though.
MARTINEZ: And if you're tense
and if you're hypervigilant,
you're going to have a lot of
norepinephrine and epinephrine
and cortisol.
As you relax, cortisol
takes about 30 minutes
to get from the trauma to
upper levels in the blood.
You have 30 minutes
to reverse that.
So if you're truck
driving around
and you have this
reaction, you're
going to have a sympathetic
system released quickly.
But the cortisol
will take longer.
So what you do is you relax.
How can I celebrate that
I didn't have an accident?
Let me get some
comfortable music.
Let me breathe.
The person next to
you, blood pressure
up, under immunity
because of the reaction,
you're driving around
and you learn something
from what happened.
And so you become a master
of your own health--
with the help of other people,
professionals and so forth.
But you are responsible
for your health.
LISA: Wow.
That's such a key.
MARTINEZ: It's empowering.
LISA: What you just said now is
such a key, especially when it
comes to our health
care system and what's
happening with the changes
in our health care system.
Preventative health and
taking responsibility
for your own health is
pretty much in the way
of the future at this point.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
LISA: And as is forgiveness,
you mentioned that earlier.
Forgiveness is key, right?
MARTINEZ: Forgiveness is key.
And forgiveness, a
way to look at it,
is an act of self-love
to liberate yourself.
You don't have to reconcile
with the perpetrator.
LISA: So it can be
just for yourself.
MARTINEZ: For yourself.
And you don't have to
sanctify the perpetrator.
The perpetrator continues
to be a perpetrator,
continues to be a rapist,
continues to be a whatever.
But what you're doing is
you're taking the power away
that that person took
from you, from the wound
that that person created.
LISA: Let's think about
that for a second.
So, yes, they take your power
way when you're violated.
So how do you get
that power back?
It's not from them.
MARTINEZ: No.
LISA: It's I'm yourself.
MARTINEZ: It's from yourself.
And there's a
method that I teach.
It's not just an
intellectual process.
You have to find out
what wound it cause,
because across cultures I
found that the three wounds.
I call them archetypal
wounds, because you see them
in every culture.
shame, abandonment,
and betrayal.
So you have to find out what
if somebody was predatory
with you.
What did they do?
Did they abandoned you?
Did they betray?
Or did they shame you?
And each of them has a
different biochemical process.
Shame has a lot of inflammatory.
LISA: What does betrayal have?
MARTINEZ: Betrayal has
a lot of also anger.
When you feel betrayed,
you have a lot of anger.
So you have a lot
of norepinephrine
in a lot of the
sympathetic system.
And it has a
propensity, not a cause,
but a propensity for
cardiovascular problems.
People that are very
angry, you see that.
And you see people with strokes.
It doesn't cause.
It's just correlation.
LISA: OK, what
about abandonment?
MARTINEZ: Abandonment
is you feel cold
when abandonment actually.
At 4, you could feel
abandoned because mommy
didn't come to pick you up.
The kids are there
and mommy is there.
So you feel a sense of
isolation, coldness.
And you also have that
sense of hypervigilance.
Where's my mother?
So you're teaching nervous
system to be hypervigilant.
And with the one that's been
study the most is shame.
With shame, you
have inflammation.
Many of autoimmune
illnesses have
some kind of shame trauma in
addition to predisposition.
LISA: Very interesting.
All right, so you talk about the
idea of navigating uncertainty
with chaos as your guide.
Navigating uncertainty
with chaos as your guide,
what does that mean?
MARTINEZ: That sounds
crazy, doesn't it?
LISA: Yeah.
MARTINEZ: But what
happens is uncertainty
is there all the time.
We create order in the world.
The world is not ordered.
We create order.
We go from A to B. And
we think that this order,
because it's the left
side of the brain that's
causing sequence.
But the world is
basically chaotic.
And chaotic is not random.
Chaotic is from
complexity theory.
It's really disordered order.
But it has a different geometry.
It's not Euclidean.
LISA: It's random.
MARTINEZ: Random would be
that it has no predictability.
Chaos has predictability.
But like, for example,
when you're boiling water,
you see bubbles coming
and they're predictable.
But when chaos comes in,
there's a bifurcation
that that becomes chaotic,
not random, but chaotic.
When the temperature goes
down, it goes back to linear.
So what happens?
You're driving around.
And in LA this will
be a very frequent.
You're stuck in traffic--
LISA: Like that out there.
MARTINEZ: Stuck in traffic.
So you were predicting that
you were going to get there
on time without the traffic.
So it's a predictive mode.
That's linear.
The moment that the
complexity comes in,
the moment that bifurcation
comes in and says,
no, no, you're going to be
stuck here, this is different.
Then you go from
confirmation to discovery.
And you stop and you
look for novelty.
How am I breathing now?
Could I go a different way?
What kind of music would
I like to listen to now?
So what you do is you divert.
But you go into discovery,
not confirmation.
Confirmation is how can
I get out of here, how
can I get out of
here, instead of what
can I find in this moment?
And your brain, when
you go into discovery,
you go into what's
called mindfulness.
You release the tension and
you might discover something.
When my kids were very
young, I would take them out.
And I would tell
you, we're going
to find uncertainty today.
And we'd go out and get lost.
Where do we go?
Right, left, right, left.
And when we were
lost, OK, now let's
let chaos tell us
what we need to do.
And we'd start discovering
new restaurants, playgrounds.
LISA: How nice.
MARTINEZ: But
indirectly what they
were learning is that
uncertainty is something
that gives you an opportunity
to learn, rather than to be
afraid.
LISA: Interesting.
That's a fun thing to do.
Now you live permanently in--
MARTINEZ: Uruguay.
LISA: Right now.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
And I travel quite a
bit with the work I do.
LISA: Where were you born?
MARTINEZ: I was born
in Cuba actually.
And my father was from Spain.
My mother's from Cuba.
And I lived in the US most of
my life, in New York and Miami.
LISA: At what point did you
start studying medicine?
And why did you?
MARTINEZ: I went from
medicine into psychology.
I moved into
neuropsychology, which
was something like
neurology and psychology,
because I was very interested
in really finding out
how the brain works.
And unfortunately,
when you study--
neuropsychologist
is changing stuff--
but when you study
neuropsychology
it studies the sick brain.
Somebody has a stroke.
And you have some damage
and broke an area,
then you're going to
have a type of aphasia.
But now Richard Davis
and other neuroscientists
are studying the healthy brain.
And what we know is that
the brain is not bipolar,
on and off.
The brain has a range.
If you lose some
ability for speech,
you can pick it
up somewhere else.
There is tremendous plasticity,
tremendous redundancy.
And so it has an opportunity
to repair itself.
LISA: How do you do that though?
How does it repair itself?
Do you know of a
specific technique?
MARTINEZ: Yes.
Well, let me give
you an example.
There was a scientist that
did some very interesting work
with teachers that were going
to teach blind students.
So in order for them to really
experience what it was like,
they were blinded.
They were covered for six weeks.
The teachers were.
And it takes about six weeks for
the brain to recontextualize.
And the occipital part of the
brain-- this part of back,
it's a visual cortex--
when you are seeing
something, you have an MRI,
they show that part of
the brain lighting up.
And that's visual cortex.
And that's a visual cortex.
That's what it is.
These people were
blind for six weeks.
What happened to the brain?
It was no longer
the visual cortex.
It became tactile.
LISA: That was the center of
the brain that lit up the most?
MARTINEZ: So instead
of being visual,
they became like the blind
people, and it became tactile.
So the brain can be so plastic.
Now, six weeks later,
after they started seeing,
it went back to occipital,
occipital visual.
LISA: So only in a matter of
six weeks the brain can change.
MARTINEZ: Can change, Yes.
LISA: That's fascinating.
When I went through a head
trauma about 13 years ago,
I lost my ability to speak.
And it took me a
while through EEG
and different types of things--
MARTINEZ: Biofeedback--
LISA: Yeah, biofeedback-- to
rebuild that part of my brain.
It's true.
I mean, look, I'm
speaking for a living now.
MARTINEZ: And you're
speaking for a living.
That's right.
I used to have a phobia
of speaking in public.
In the fourth grade, I
had a five-minute speech.
And I looked at my
watch, I went, oh, God, I
got three minutes.
I'll never do public speaking.
And guess what happens?
You challenge yourself and
it becomes your passion.
Like you.
LISA: Like you're doing.
All right, so let's
talk a little bit
about-- you mentioned
earlier in the show
about the stigmata people.
And I'm going to have you just
take a look really quickly
to see what stigmata is.
And then we'll talk
about these people
take a look at this video.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
NARRATOR: Clinical
psychologist Mario Martinez
has come to Mexico's
capital to investigate
one intriguing case, that
of 53-year-old grandmother
Elizabeth Sanchez.
At Easter and during
other holy days,
Elizabeth reportedly bleeds
from her hands, feet side, side,
and forehead.
MARTINEZ: This is an
opportunity to really learn.
The way I look at it
is I'm a detective.
And I'm trying to
figure out what's
going on with the person.
And what's going on
with the evidence.
And I put them both together.
And it's fascinating
every time I do.
NARRATOR: The word stigmata
has evolved over the centuries.
It's Greek root,
stigma, literally
means mark, as in
the mark people
branded onto their cattle,
their slaves, and even
their soldiers.
The term appears just
once in the New Testament.
In his letter to the Galatians,
the Apostle Paul writes,
I bear the marks of the
Lord Jesus in my body.
MONSIGNOR CHARLES SCICLUNA:
Paul uses this title,
i am a servant or
slave of Christ.
For him, they are
marks of Christ,
because they are the
result of his allegiance,
his loyalty to his master.
NARRATOR: It took more than
1,000 years for these stigmas
to become stigmata, the mystical
marks of Christ's crucifixion.
Martinez is one of only a
handful of medical experts
who specialize in stigmata.
He's been called on twice
by the Catholic church
to officially investigate the
authenticity of the phenomenon.
He's also looked into a
number of lower profile
cases on his own, two of which
he believes to be legitimate.
MARTINEZ: An
authentic stigmatic is
one who has the wounds that can
not be explained biologically.
NARRATOR: This time Martinez
has a rare opportunity.
Elizabeth is bleeding.
And Martinez can take
a sample of his blood.
The cross on
Elizabeth's forehead
is not the typical
mark of a stigmatic.
It's not a wound that Jesus
received in his final hours.
But Martinez believes
it's just as interesting.
MARTINEZ: There's
some things that
seem compatible with
what I seen before.
And there's some
very new things,
like the cross is very new.
The way that the blood
is dripping is very new.
I think that there's something
here that is legitimate.
It's worth looking into.
NARRATOR: Elizabeth
explains to Dr. Martinez
that she has received the
more familiar marks of Christ
in the past.
[PLAYBACK ENDS]
LISA: Was that real?
Was that woman real?
Did she really--
MARTINEZ: Well, it seems like--
fortunately, all I have to do
is just to look at the science.
What we have to do is
we have to rule out
hysteria, multiple
personalities,
self-inflicted
injurious behavior.
And then we did bloodwork
to see what was going on.
And the bloodwork
showed that there
were deep wounds, which
means that you can't do that
without somebody noticing it.
She woke up one
evening, one night
in the middle of the night,
and she had the cross,
and screaming.
And her husband
looked at it-- and so
there were no knives or
nothing to cut herself.
LISA: So how did the blood
show it was a deep wound?
MARTINEZ: There's
some blood work
that you can do to see if
it's superficial or deep
with the scab that they took.
But then they also did
immunological work.
And I was expecting her to
have a lot of neutrophils,
which are the ones that
fight infection, normal.
I was expecting cortisol to be
high because of stress, normal.
So all those things
were happening.
It wasn't healing.
It wasn't getting infected.
And the immune system
wasn't doing anything.
LISA: What type
of person was she?
I mean I understand
she was very religious.
MARTINEZ: A spiritual person.
But another thing about it
is that kind of the fakes
like to capitalize on them.
They manipulate them.
For two years she was
hiding that she had that.
And people would come
to her would heal.
But she kept it secret.
She did want anybody to know.
But the interesting
thing here-- here's
the thing about it
that is so interesting.
I followed her for
years, several years.
And I helped her
get rid of the pain.
LISA: What pain?
MARTINEZ: You feel like
that you've been crucified.
So it's like there's
a nail going in.
So I helped her get
rid of 80% of the pain
and then helped to
get rid of the stigma.
What happened was she was
no longer healing anybody.
People weren't seeing the pain
and the connection with Christ.
So what happened?
Stigmata came back.
So she said I'd rather have it.
I have much less pain.
I'd rather have it so
I can help people heal.
LISA: Really?
MARTINEZ: But you
see, that's a culture
of suffering to reach Christ.
LISA: Well, let's
talk about that,
that abundance
versus deprivation.
You have a whole
concept on this.
What does that--
MARTINEZ: There's a
valuation self-esteem
that tells us how much
we can accept graciously
without sabotaging
it or getting sick.
You see people that they
work all their lives
to have the mansion
somewhere and Brazil
and six weeks later, cancer.
It's too much.
Joy can be too dangerous
if their self-esteem is not
ready to handle that
level of abundance.
And the deprivation
mentality is that I'm not
able to reach that level.
So I'm going to
have to look for--
I'll give an example.
Studies that were
done anthropologically
with people who came
from Cuba or came
from other countries, the ones
who had an abundance mentality,
they would move into
wealthy neighborhoods
in the most modest home.
The ones who had the
deprivation mentality
would go to the
ghettos immediately,
because that's all
they could see.
They can only see the worse.
And you interview
them 10 years later,
and they lived exactly the
expectations that they had.
You would ask them--
here's the disempowered
and empowered.
Disempowered-- well, I
don't speak the language.
You know, this is, yeah,
it's a great country
if you speak English.
So where are you going
to be 10 years from now?
The way I am now.
The other person, empowered--
a great opportunity
to learn English.
I'm going to find
out what I can do
in the country of opportunity.
10 years later,
abundance, deprivation.
Not only that, but illnesses,
and the other one healthy.
LISA: Really?
Illnesses were in
the deprivation?
MARTINEZ: In the deprivation
because deprivation,
a deprivation of
health, of everything.
LISA: So back to the
stigmata really quickly,
you had a whole course
that you taught,
called from fibromyalgia--
MARTINEZ: To stigmata.
LISA: To stigmata.
What's the correlation.
MARTINEZ: The
correlation is that they
both have a self-created-- one
because of religious views.
LISA: Oh, I see.
MARTINEZ: And the other one is
because of the learning that we
talked, that you can learn to.
So one is very explicitly
showing, not an illness,
but an actual tearing of tissue.
And the other one
is more subtle,
but they have very
similar processes.
So the mind body code.
LISA: How did you discover all
of this and these connections?
This is not something
that you would--
MARTINEZ: No, no, I was
really dissatisfied--
LISA: See in medicine--
MARTINEZ: With
conventional science.
What I studied was dissatisfied.
And then I just had these
things, what I call the drift.
I was asked by the
Catholic church
to investigate this case.
And I didn't know
how they found out.
And they said the
Vatican has ways.
LISA: Wow.
MARTINEZ: So they call, we know
you do psychoneuroimmunology.
We want you to investigate
this priest in the Caribbean
who had the stigmata.
Then you know BBC
picked up on it.
And anytime there's
any stigmatic,
they call me to investigate it.
LISA: You're now the foremost
stigmata investigator.
Yeah, that's great.
Now, you do talk about the
defiance of predatory science
and this is the side
that we have here.
What do you mean by that?
MARTINEZ: Predatory
science is the science
that actually tries to increase
the marketing of whatever they
do for the illness.
For example, you have the
science that says, well,
it's no longer necessary to have
this prevention test done once
a year.
Now you have to do
it every six months.
And all of that work, all
of that preventive work,
we're 37th in the world
in longevity and health.
So obviously it doesn't work.
It doesn't work very well, but
people make a lot of money.
So what we do have is
we have a consciousness,
a palliative medicine
consciousness.
How can I make it easier for
you to go on with your illness?
Rather than, how can I heal you?
LISA: So in having those tests
and those checkups and breast
scans and heart scans
and things like that,
you think that it
actually causes people
to look for the illness more?
MARTINEZ: More.
And I don't want to promote that
you shouldn't have checkups.
I mean, that's you're right.
I don't.
Because what is the
job of the physician?
To find something
wrong with you.
And there are physicians
who are teachers.
So rather than going there to
find something wrong with you,
they teach you how to prevent.
And they teach you how
to empower yourself.
LISA: And there's some that
are healers and are really
good healers.
MARTINEZ: And you want to
go to a scientist rather
than a technician.
A scientist will say, OK, if you
can show me, if you can give me
evidence, I'll work with you.
The technician will say,
no, that doesn't work.
This is how it is.
I'm the doctor.
I know.
You don't know.
You take this and
don't question me.
That's the technician.
They only believe
what they can measure.
LISA: Which has been
statistically measured.
MARTINEZ: That's right.
LISA: But every
body is different.
And that really does
get omitted a lot.
MARTINEZ: Yes.
And everything is contextual.
You might have high blood
pressure in one context
and not in another.
But if you're already
defined as a hypertensive,
then you're hypertensive
for the rest of your life.
You take medication that has
side effects or something
else and so forth.
And many of the hypertension can
be treated without medication--
diet, exercise, mindsets.
LISA: Well, let's talk about
the mindset of the immune system
because it is so intelligent.
And it just
automatically strives
towards homeostasis every
single second of the day.
How do you tap into that
intelligence to heal your body?
MARTINEZ: Well, the first
thing is to get out of the fear
that as you grow
older you deteriorate.
That's the first thing,
because you live in that fear.
And the next birthday, it's
almost like, oh, my God,
I'm such and such an age.
That's the first thing.
And the second, to
realize that a lot
of the processes
that are going on,
the body's fighting
pre-cancer cells constantly.
You don't even know about.
The body is repairing
tissue constantly.
The immune system is creating
antibodies for things
that it doesn't even know exist.
It has a kind of a epigenetic
value that creates in random.
So it has protection
for everything.
And then second is that you have
to have a philosophy of life.
What am I doing here?
Am I here to live and
die and then that's it?
Or am I here to learn, to
love, to have pleasure,
to enjoy the
pleasure that I have?
And that indirectly
causes health.
Indirectly.
LISA: So you're basically
teaching your mind
to act like the
immune system does.
MARTINEZ: Like the
Resilience.
Tremendous ability to
function under turbulence.
And tremendous resources.
But here's a real simple
way to look at it.
The immune system
basically has two modes.
It is either empowered
or it's helpless.
And it has two principles,
what I call empowerment
1 and empowerment 2.
Any cell, the cell will go--
a neutrophil, a macrophage,
whatever--
E1 I call it, empowerment 1.
What can I do for myself
that nobody could do for me?
That's it.
LISA: Give me an
example of that.
MARTINEZ: OK, you're working and
instead of going to your boss,
you're going, what
can I do to take
care of what's going on here?
I'm sick.
What can I do to
take care of today?
How can I take that--
once you exhaust
that, you go to E2.
What can others do for me
that I can't do for myself?
And that's how the
immune system functions.
You have a cell that
tries to fight some kind
of microorganism or whatever.
And it fights it.
But then here's the
pre-cancer cell.
And it says, no, I
can't handle this.
Let me call in
the ones that can.
So E1 and E2.
That alone, if you
do that in your life,
you're using immune
function wisdom.
LISA: So have you seen
spontaneous remissions
in your life, in your
practice with people?
Have you seen them really
truly heal their bodies
with their mind?
MARTINEZ: Yes.
And it's rare, because we
still don't know the dynamics.
We're learning.
But this case in Mexico
City, the boy who
was cured of leukemia,
because just being
around the stigmatic,
and the man who
was cured of prostate
cancer, I checked
with their physician,
nine months later,
no symptoms, complete
remission, without any symptoms.
LISA: So do you
think that that's
their immune system matching the
immune system of the stigmatic?
MARTINEZ: No, we have to
have permission to heal.
We have to get permission
from God, a doctor,
or from a shaman to trigger
what we already have.
Our healing system we already
have, it has to be triggered.
So we need permission.
And if this person
who's Catholic
believes that there's
divine intervention,
they're around a holy person,
that holy person can heal them.
And even a child,
he didn't even know.
It's a cultural belief system.
LISA: Couldn't we give that
permission to ourselves?
MARTINEZ: Yes, we can.
And that's when people but get
to levels where they actually
are very empowered.
And that's what centenarians do.
LISA: They heal themselves?
MARTINEZ: Yes, they
go to a doctor.
And he says, well, you have
an illness that 99% of people
die from.
And he says, well, I'm going
to go out and celebrate
because I must be that 1%.
That's how they function.
Resilient and they
don't give up.
LISA: How many of them
have you interviewed?
MARTINEZ: Probably
about 400, 450.
LISA: Wow.
Oh, my goodness.
And what is the main thing
that you think that they
eat that keeps them healthy?
Do you think it's
the food at all?
MARTINEZ: I used to
think it was food.
Some will eat meat.
Some are vegetarians.
Some eat fish.
Some, a lot of lactose.
So it's basically how they eat.
They don't abuse food.
There are some that are
hefty, but very few obese.
So they basically
enjoy what they eat.
They smoke, some, very
moderately, ritualistically.
They drink wine.
They'll have rum at
the end of the day.
But they don't abuse.
It's not an abuse of the--
LISA: It's ritualistic.
MARTINEZ: It's ritualistic.
So it has a medicinal
purpose in the sense
that if I'm going to
have this as a ritual.
If you have one shot
of rum at night,
obviously it's not going to kill
you because this woman is 103.
So there's evidence there that
it's not going to kill you.
I'm not suggesting you do that.
I'm suggesting you
find a ritual that
has meaning in your
culture, whatever
that is, whether it's meditation
or prayer or whatever it is.
And you do it.
And that has the healing effect.
LISA: Have you ever been sick?
MARTINEZ: Yeah, I've
had colds and things
like that and one accident,
three broken ribs.
But I've never been
really sick in that sense.
LISA: If you were to
catch a virus or whatnot,
do you think that all that
you know you could actually
heal that with your mind?
MARTINEZ: With your
mind and your body.
And if you can't, then you can
go to an understanding doctor,
to a scientist,
not a technician.
The scientist will say, if you
show me evidence, I'll agree.
A technician will say, no,
only what I can measure.
That's a technician,
not a scientist.
LISA: I mean it's
interesting, because I
think that we need to empower
ourselves more when it comes
to health care these days
because our health care
system is changing so
quickly and so frequently.
That there's a situation
where we're in as a country
right now, we don't really
know the outcome of it.
So I mean, some doctors are
charging an arm and a leg
because they don't
want to go-- and they
want to privatize now
because they don't
want to go through Obamacare.
And there's so many
different things
that's happening with
our health care system.
Is there any way that you
know of that can actually
help train doctors to be
more of the intuitive healer
rather than just the technician?
Are they running so scared
at this point that that's
a thing of the past?
MARTINEZ: We're doing it.
We've trained over 400 doctors
in different countries,
and in Uruguay and in Ireland
and the United States.
But there's some
medical schools now
that are doing integrative
medicine, who are actually
bringing in other methods.
LISA: Do you think that's
the future of medicine?
MARTINEZ: I think so.
And not alternative medicine,
because alternative is
either modern medicine or not.
You have to integrate the
best of the two systems.
LISA: And that's
combination of--
MARTINEZ: Western medicine,
some Eastern, and even
some other Native American.
There's a physician,
Luis Medrano,
who's a well trained physician
from Stanford Medical
School, who uses narratives,
like the Navajo culture
that he came from.
LISA: Stories?
MARTINEZ: Storytelling.
And storytelling can
have a healing effect.
LISA: Yes, you tell
a lot of stories.
MARTINEZ: That's right.
LISA: Absolutely.
MARTINEZ: But we do have
to get away from what
I call conveyor belt medicine.
The cubicles and, oh, yes, a
psychiatrist on the average
will see a person
for eight minutes.
And they look at
vegetative signs.
And they're, OK, we're
going to change this.
We'll be back.
You can't heal like that.
It doesn't work.
LISA: But that's the way
the insurance companies are
forcing the doctors to be.
MARTINEZ: Absolutely.
And a doctor will graduate
from medical school
with an average
debt of $200,000.
What are they going to do?
They have to buy
into the system.
And they have to charge,
because you have to live.
So it's the system
that has to change.
How does it change?
The free market can change
it to a certain degree,
because you don't like
what this person's doing,
you start taking
responsibility for your health.
And then you go to
other integrative kind
of systems that are going on.
A good friend of
mine is a physician
and he's teaching
people, in addition
to whatever medical
intervention he does,
he teaches them a
lifestyle that's
incompatible with the illness--
LISA: Incompatible?
MARTINEZ: Incompatible
with the illness.
LISA: In what way?
What do you mean?
MARTINEZ: For example,
if you're a diabetic
and you take
medication, what would
be incompatible with
being a diabetic?
One of the things that you
can do is-- well, good health.
But one of the
things about diabetes
is that there's a certain
amount of unresolved anger.
And if you ask the person,
yeah, I don't get angry.
I don't get angry.
When you don't get angry, you
secrete a lot of endorphins.
And there's some research
beginning to look at this.
And when you secrete
a lot of endorphins,
which is good, but
too much is not good,
you anesthetize the anger.
And high levels of
endorphins begins
to affect the
metabolism of glucose.
LISA: Sugar.
MARTINEZ: So there's
some correlation there.
LISA: Interesting.
So are you saying to diabetics
to have anger management?
MARTINEZ: To be able to
express what they feel--
LISA: Healthily--
MARTINEZ: To express it healthy.
To let go of the control.
And this is for people who
are afraid of family history.
So you have a family
history of diabetes type 2.
What do you do?
You begin to look for
people in your family
who didn't have diabetes type 2.
And find out what were the
causes of their health.
LISA: Good point.
That's the reverse.
Wow.
What a great conversation.
And we this is so terrific
that you have shed such light
on a reverse side of medicine.
You've shed light on the
health aspects of everything.
So if you would like to watch
my interview with Dr. Mario
Martinez or share with your
friends, go to gaiamtv.com
Thank you so much for
sharing the hour with me.
MARTINEZ: My pleasure.
Thank you.
LISA: And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]